SOURCE: C:\Users\Simone\Desktop\DOC+teoria\slide\7. Diagrammi delle Classi.pdf
PAGES: 23


--- PAGE 1 ---
Diagrammi delle Classi
Ingegneria del Software 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Tassonomia dei diagrammi UML
UML 2 definisce 13 diagrammi divisi in due categorie 
structure diagrams: come è fatto il sistema 
behaviour diagrams: come funziona (o si comporta) il sistema
2
UML 2 deﬁnisce 13 diagrammi (contro i 9 di UML 1.x), divisi
in due categorie:
I Structure diagrams: come è fatto il sistema; forniscono le
viste Logical, Development e Physical
I Behavior diagrams: come funziona il sistema; forniscono
le viste Process e Use case
Structure Behavior
Class diagram Use Case diagram
Object diagram Activity diagram
Package diagram* State Machine diagram
Composite Structure diagram* Sequence diagram
Component diagram Communication diagram
Deployment diagram Interaction Overview diagram*
Timing diagram*
* : non esiste in UML 1.x
Lab Sistemi e Processi Organizzativi () Introduzione a UML A.A. 2006-2007 23 / 48

--- PAGE 3 ---
Tassonomia dei diagrammi UML 2
3
T assonomia dei 13 diagrammi di UML 2
714                 UML Superstructure Specification, v2.1
Figure A.5 - The taxonomy of structure and behavior diagram
Structure diagrams show the static structure of the objects in a system. That is, they depict those elements in a 
specification that are irrespective of time. The elements in a structure diagram represent the meaningful concepts of an 
application, and may include abstract, real-world and implementation concepts. For example, a structure diagram for an 
airline reservation system might include classifiers that represent seat assignment algorithms, tickets, and a credit 
authorization service. Structure diagrams do not show the details of dynamic behavior, which are illustrated by behavioral 
diagrams. However, they may show relationships to the behaviors of the classifiers exhibited in the structure diagrams.
Behavior diagrams show the dynamic behavior of the objects in a system, including their methods, collaborations, 
activities, and state histories. The dynamic behavior of a system can be described as a series of changes to the system over 
time. Behavior diagrams can be further classified into several other kinds as illustrated in Figure A.5.
Please note that this taxonomy provides a logical organization for the various major kinds of diagrams. However, it does 
not preclude mixing different kinds of diagram types, as one might do when one combines structural and behavioral 
elements (e.g., showing a state machine nested inside an internal structure). Consequently, the boundaries between the 
various kinds of diagram types are not strictly enforced.
The constructs contained in each of the thirteen UML diagrams is described in the Superstructure chapters as indicated 
below.
• Acti vit y Diagram - “Act ivi ties” on page  30 7 
• Class Diagram - “Classes” on page 21
• Commu nicat ion Di agram - “Int eracti ons” on page  47 7
• Compon ent Diag ram - “C omp onen ts” on page 147
• Composite Structure Diagram - “Composite Structures” on page 167
• Depl oyment diagram - “Deplo yments” on page  20 1
D iagram
S tructure
D iagram
B ehavior
D iagram
Interaction
D iagram
Use Case
Diagram
Activity
Diagram
Com posite
Structure
 Diagram
Class Diagram
Com ponent
Diagram
Deploym ent
Diagram
Sequence
Diagram
Interaction
Overview
Diagram
Object
Diagram
State Machine
Diagram
Package
Diagram
Com m unication
Diagram
Tim ing
Diagram
Lab Sistemi e Processi Organizzativi () Introduzione a UML A.A. 2006-2007 24 / 48


--- PAGE 4 ---
Overview 
Il diagramma delle classi è uno dei modelli UML più usati  
si presta a rappresentare il maggior numero di concetti durante una fase di 
progettazione 
Descrive:  
il tipo di oggetti che fanno parte di un sistema  
le varie tipologie di relazioni statiche tra essi 
le proprietà e le operazioni di una classe e i vincoli che si applicano ai 
collegamenti tra oggetti
4

--- PAGE 5 ---
Proprietà
Le proprietà rappresentano le caratteristiche strutturali di una classe 
Un unico concetto 
Rappresentato con due notazioni molto diverse 
Attributi  
associazioni 
Aspetto grafico molto differente 
Concettualmente sono la stessa cosa
5

--- PAGE 6 ---
Proprietà: attributi
La notazione per gli attributi descrive una proprietà con una riga di testo 
all'interno del box della classe 
Esempio: 
- titolo: String [1]= “UML distilled”
6

--- PAGE 7 ---
Proprietà: associazioni
Altro modo di rappresentare una proprietà è in forma di associazione 
Gran parte dell'informazione che può essere associata ad un attributo si applica 
anche alle associazioni
7
+ data: Data[0..1]
+ prepagato: booleano[1]
+ elementiLinea: LineaDOrdine[*]
Ordine
Proprietà espresse come attributi
Data
LineaDOrdine
Ordine Boolean
0..1+ data
*
1
+ prepagato
*+ elementiLinea
1
Proprietà espresse come associazioni

--- PAGE 8 ---
Associazioni e attributi
Due notazioni per rappresentare la stessa cosa 
Quando usare una e quando l’altra? 
In generale gli attributi si usano per “le piccole cose” 
Date o campi booleani 
Le associazioni sono riservate alle classi più importanti
8

--- PAGE 9 ---
Molteplicità
La molteplicità di una proprietà è l'indicazione di quanti oggetti possono entrare a 
farvi parte 
Molteplicità più comuni: 
1 - un ordine deve essere fatto da un cliente 
0..1 - un'azienda cliente può avere un rappresentante o no 
* - il numero di ordini va da zero a molti 
In generale le molteplicità si possono definire usando due estremi 
se i due estremi coincidono si può usare un solo numero 
* È un'abbreviazione di 0..*
9

--- PAGE 10 ---
Associazioni bidirezionali
Finora associazioni unidirezionali 
Associazione bidirezionale: 
È costituita da una coppia di proprietà collegate delle quali una è l’ inverso 
dell’altra 
Esempio: 
La classe Automobile ha la proprietà proprietario: Persona[1]
La classe Persona ha la proprietà automobili: Automobile [*]
10

--- PAGE 11 ---
11
Persona Automobile
possessore
0..1 *
Persona Automobile
0..1 *
possiede

--- PAGE 12 ---
Generalizzazione
Specializzazione/ereditarietà: una relazione 
tassonomica tra un elemento più generale ed uno più 
specifico
12
Parent
Child
Superclasse
Classe generica
classe derivata
classe specializzata
IS-A

--- PAGE 13 ---
Aggregazione e composizione 
Aggregazione: è un caso speciale di composizione e rappresenta la 
gerarchia di “parte-di” 
Composizione: una forma forte di aggregazione dove la vita dell’elemento 
componente è controllata dall’elemento aggregante, le parti non esistono 
se non esiste il contenitore
13
Macchina Motore 
Ruota  
*
*
1
4
Libro
Capitolo  
*
*

--- PAGE 14 ---
Usiamo i Class Diagrams
Modellare le relazioni tra gli oggetti

--- PAGE 15 ---
Modellare le relazioni tra gli oggetti
Finora abbiamo: 
identificato i requisiti non funzionali 
identificato i requisiti funzionali e li abbiamo rappresentati attraverso diagrammi dei casi d’uso - 
functional model 
abbiamo documentato il flusso degli eventi nei casi d’uso  
abbiamo identificato di oggetti tramite l’euristica di Abbott: 
entity 
boundary  
control 
abbiamo legato i casi d’uso agli oggetti tramite i sequence diagrams - dynamic model 
…. adesso modelliamo le relazioni tra gli oggetti —> analysis object model
15

--- PAGE 16 ---
Software Engineering Development Activities 17
Figure 1-2 An overview of object-oriented software engineering development activities and their
products. This diagram depicts only logical dependencies among work products. Object-oriented software
engineering is iterative ; that is, activities can occur in parallel and more than once.
Requirements
elicitation (Ch.4)
Analysis (Ch.5)
System design
Object design
Implementation
problem
functionalnonfunctional
analysis object
object design
design goals
dynamic model
subsystem
class diagram
use case diagram
source code
Test (Ch.11)
deliverable system
class diagram
system design
(Ch.6 & 7)
(Ch.8 & 9)
sequence diagram
(Ch. 10)
state machine
statement
requirements model
model
diagram
decomposition
object model
model

--- PAGE 17 ---
Software Engineering Development Activities 17
Figure 1-2 An overview of object-oriented software engineering development activities and their
products. This diagram depicts only logical dependencies among work products. Object-oriented software
engineering is iterative ; that is, activities can occur in parallel and more than once.
Requirements
elicitation (Ch.4)
Analysis (Ch.5)
System design
Object design
Implementation
problem
functionalnonfunctional
analysis object
object design
design goals
dynamic model
subsystem
class diagram
use case diagram
source code
Test (Ch.11)
deliverable system
class diagram
system design
(Ch.6 & 7)
(Ch.8 & 9)
sequence diagram
(Ch. 10)
state machine
statement
requirements model
model
diagram
decomposition
object model
model

--- PAGE 18 ---
Identiﬁcare le associazioni
Una relazione tra due o più classi 
Identificare le associazioni ha due vantaggi 
Chiarisce il modello di analisi rendendo esplicita la relazione tra gli oggetti 
Consente allo sviluppatore di identificare casi limite associati alle relazioni 
Per esempio: è intuitivo assumere che l’ EmergencyReports è scritto da un FieldOfficer, 
ma questo report può essere scritto da più FieldOfficer? Il sistema deve permettere 
EmergencyReport anonimi? 
17
190 Chapter 5  •  Analysis
are then assigned to each class as the scenario unfolds and participants negotiate the
responsibilities of each object. The collaborators column is filled as the dependencies with other
cards are identified. Cards are modified or pushed to the side as new alternatives are explored.
Cards are never thrown away, because building blocks for past alternatives can be reused when
new ideas are put on the table.
CRC cards and sequence diagrams are two different representations for supporting the
same type of activity. Sequence diagrams are a better tool for a single modeler or for
documenting a sequence of interactions, because they are more precise and compact. CRC cards
are a better tool for a group of develop ers refining and iterating over an object structure during a
brainstorming session, because they are easier to create and to modify.
5.4.6 Identifying Associations
Whereas sequence diagrams allow developers to represent interactions among objects over time,
class diagrams allow developers to describe the int erdependencies of objects. We described the
UML class diagram notation in Chapter 2, Modeling with UML , and use it throughout the book
to represent various project artifacts (e.g., activiti es, deliverables). In this section, we discuss the
use of class diagrams for representing associati ons among objects. In Section 5.4.8, we discuss
the use of class diagrams for representing object attributes.
An association  shows a relationship between two or more classes. For example, a
FieldOfficer  writes an EmergencyReport  (see Figure 5-13). Identifying associations has two
advantages. First, it clarifies the analysis mo del by making relationships between objects explicit
(e.g., an EmergencyReport  c a n  b e  c r e a t e d  b y  a  FieldOfficer  o r  a  Dispatcher ). Second, it
enables the developer to discover boundary cases associated with links. Boundary cases are
exceptions that must be clarified in the model. For example, it is intuitive to assume that most
EmergencyReports  a r e  w r i t t e n  b y  o n e  FieldOfficer . However, should the system support
EmergencyReports  written by more than one? Should the system allow for anonymous
EmergencyReports ? Those questions should be investigated du ring analysis by discussing them
with the client or with end users.
Associations have several properties:
• A name  t o  d e s c r i b e  t h e  a s s o c i a t i o n  b e t w e e n  t h e  t w o  c l a s s e s  ( e . g . ,  Writes  i n
Figure 5-13). Association names are optional and need not be unique globally.
Figure 5-13 An example of association between the EmergencyReport  and the FieldOfficer  classes.
FieldOfficer EmergencyReport
1 *writes
author document

--- PAGE 19 ---
Identiﬁcare le associazioni
Inizialmente le associazioni tra oggetti entità sono le più importanti 
Rivelano più informazioni sul dominio di applicazione 
Secondo l’euristica di Abbott 
identificare verbi e frasi particolari contenenti verbi 
has, is part of, manages, reports to, is triggered by, is contained in, talks 
to, includes 
ad ogni associazione deve essere dato un nome ed un ruolo 
18

--- PAGE 20 ---
Identiﬁcare gli aggregati
Le associazioni di composizione e aggregazione sono usate per rappresentare i concetti 
di tutto-parte (whole-part)  
Aggregazione e associazione aggiungono informazioni a modello 
Le aggregazioni sono spesso usate nelle interfacce utente
19
192 Chapter 5  •  Analysis
5.4.7 Identifying Aggregates
Aggregations  are special types of associations denoti ng a whole–part relationship. For example,
a FireStation  c o n s i s t s  o f  a  n u m b e r  o f  FireFighters , FireEngines , Ambulances , and a
LeadCar . A State  is composed of a number of Counties  that are, in turn, composed of a number
of Townships  (Figure 5-15). An aggregation is shown as a association with a diamond on the
side of the whole part. 
There are two types of aggregation, compo sition and shared. A solid diamond denotes
composition. A composition aggregation  indicates that the existence of the parts depends on
the whole. For example, a County  is always part of exactly one State , a Township  is always part
of a County . As political boundaries do not change often, a Township  will not be part of or
shared with another County  (at least, in the life time of the emergency response system). 
A hollow diamond denotes a shared aggregation  relationship, indicating the whole and
the part can exist independently. For example, although a FireEngine  is part of at most one
FireStation  at the time, it can be reassigned to a different FireStation  during its life time. 
Figure 5-14 Eliminating redundant association. The receipt of an EmergencyReport  triggers the creation
of an Incident  b y  a  Dispatcher . Given that the EmergencyReport  h a s  a n  a s s o c i a t i o n  w i t h  t h e
FieldOfficer  t h a t  w r o t e  i t ,  i t  i s  n o t  n e c e s s a r y  t o  k e e p  a n  a s s o c i a t i o n  b e t w e e n  FieldOfficer  a n d
Incident .
Figure 5-15 Examples of aggregations and compositions (UML class diagram). A State  is composed of
many Counties , which in turn is composed of many Townships . A FireStation  includes FireFighters ,
FireEngines ,Ambulances , and a LeadCar .
FieldOfficer EmergencyReport
1 *writes
author document
Incident
1
11
1
triggersreports
State
County
Township
FireStation
FireFighter
FireEngine
LeadCar
Ambulance

--- PAGE 21 ---
Identiﬁcare gli attributi
Gli attributi sono le proprietà del singolo oggetto 
per esempio: EmergencyReport ha un emergencyType, una location, ed una descrizione 
Le proprietà che sono rappresentate da altri oggetti non sono attributi 
per esempio: EmergencyReport ha un autore che è rappresentato da una classe 
FieldOfficer
20
Analysis Activities: From Use Cases to Objects 193
Aggregation associations are used in the analysis model to denote whole–part concepts.
Aggregation associations add information to the analysis mo del about how containment
concepts in the application domain can be organized in a hierarchy or in a directed graph.
Aggregations are often used in the user interf ace to help the user browse through many
instances. For example, in Figure 5-15, FRIEND  c o u l d  o f f e r  a  t r e e  r e p r e s e n t a t i o n  f o r
Dispatchers  to find Counties  within a State  or Townships  with a specific County . However, as
with many modeling concepts, it is easy to over- structure the model. If yo u are not sure that the
association you are describing is a whole–part concept, it is better to model it as a one-to-many
association, and revisit it later when you have a be tter understanding of the application domain.
5.4.8 Identifying Attributes
Attributes  are properties of individual objects. For example, an EmergencyReport , as described
in Table 5-2, has an emergency type, a location, and a description property (see Figure 5-16).
These are entered by a FieldOfficer  w h e n  s h e  r e p o r t s  a n  e m e r g e n c y  a n d  a r e  s u b s e q u e n t l y
tracked by the system. When identifying properties of objects, only the attributes relevant to the
system should be considered. For example, each FieldOfficer  has a social security number that
is not relevant to the emergenc y information system. Instead, FieldOfficers  are identified by
badge number, which is represented by the badgeNumber  property.
Properties that are represented by objects are not attributes. For example, every
EmergencyReport  has an author that is represented by an association to the FieldOfficer  class.
Developers should identify as many associations as possible before identifying attributes to
avoid confusing attributes and objects. Attributes have:
• A name  i d e n t i f y i n g  t h em within an object. For example, an EmergencyReport  m a y
have a reportType  a t t r i b u t e  a n d  a n  emergencyType  a t t r i b u t e .  T h e  reportType
describes the kind of report being filed (e.g., initial report, request for resource, final
report). The emergencyType  describes the type of emergency (e.g., fire, traffic, other).
To avoid confusion, these attributes should not both be called type .
• A brief description.
Figure 5-16 Attributes of the EmergencyReport  class.
EmergencyReport
emergencyType:{fire,traffic,other}
location:String
description:String

--- PAGE 22 ---
Documentazione 
RAD

--- PAGE 23 ---
Requirements Analysis Document
22
152 Chapter 4  •  Requirements Elicitation
of the current system. Otherwise, this section describes how the tasks supported by the new
system are accomplished now. For example, in the case of SatWatch , the user currently resets
her watch whenever she travels across a time zone. Because of the manual nature of this
operation, the user occasionally sets the wrong time and occasionally neglects to reset. In
contrast, the SatWatch  will continually ensure accurate time within its lifetime. In the case of
FRIEND , the current system is paper based: di spatchers keep track of resource assignments by
filling out forms. Communication between dispatchers and field officers is by radio. The current
system requires a high documentatio n and management cost that FRIEND  aims to reduce.
The third section, Proposed system,  d o c u m e n t s  t h e  r e q u i r e m e n t s  e l i c i t a t i o n  a n d  t h e
analysis model of the new system. It is divided into four subsections:
• Overview  presents a functional overview of the system. 
Requirements Analysis Document
1. Introduction
1.1 Purpose of the system
1.2 Scope of the system
1.3 Objectives and success criteria of the project
1.4 Definitions, acronyms, and abbreviations
1.5 References
1.6 Overview
2. Current system
3. Proposed system
3.1 Overview
3.2 Functional requirements
3.3 Nonfunctional requirements
3.3.1 Usability
3.3.2 Reliability
3.3.3 Performance
3.3.4 Supportability
3.3.5 Implementation
3.3.6 Interface
3.3.7 Packaging
3.3.8 Legal
3.4 System models
3.4.1 Scenarios
3.4.2 Use case model
3.4.3 Object model
3.4.4 Dynamic model
3.4.5 User interface—navigational paths and screen mock-ups
4. Glossary
Figure 4-16 Outline of the Requirements Analysis Document (RAD). Sections in italics  are completed
during analysis (see next chapter).